first few steps of post + draft of last step (#1)
kstolen0/kstolen0.github.io: _drafts/2024-05-18-get-started-with-aws-tf-01.md

---
layout: post
title: "Getting Started with AWS and Terraform: 01 - Creating an EC2 Intance"
date: 2024-05-17 16:00:00 +0800
categories: aws terraform infratructure IaC
description: In this multi-part blog series we will learn how to create a modern enterprise ready web service in AWS using Terraform. In this first post we will create an EC2 instance to host our web service in AWS using Terraform
---

> # Introduction

Reviewer: I think it'd be worth outlining some of the assumed knowledge you'd want readers to have. It'll help you figure out what level of detail to include (as referenced in above comments) but also provide readers with a quick way to figure out if they will be able to consume this information.

My (opinionated) take on assumed knowledge would be something like the below but feel free to customise this as you want.

> It is assumed you have basic, entry-level knowledge of the following:
> - What Infrastructure as Code (IaC) is (eg Terraform, Pulumi, CloudFormation)
> - What a cloud infrastructure provider is (eg AWS, Google Cloud, Azure)
> - How to run basic commands in a terminal
> - How to use a code editor or IDE
> - Basic knowledge of a programming language

You could then optionally provide some links to some docs that introduce some of these concepts if readers are unfamiliar or just need a quick reminder.

> In this series of blog posts, we will build an enterprise scale web infrastructure; Starting small with a simple virtual machine image, and iterating as our needs develop until eventually we will have a highly availble, secure, and resiliant web infrastructure capable of meeting the needs of tens of customers! All of this will be managed with the popular Infrastructure As Code tool, Terraform.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this series of blog posts, we will build an enterprise scale web infrastructure; Starting small with a simple virtual machine image, and iterating as our needs develop until eventually we will have a highly availble, secure, and resilient web infrastructure capable of meeting the needs of tens of customers! All of this will be managed with the popular Infrastructure As Code tool, Terraform.  
```

but also lol at this 😅 

> meeting the needs of tens of customers!

In this first post, we will:
 1. Configure Terraform with a pre-existing AWS account
 2. Deploy an EC2 instance to AWS
 3. Allow incoming connections to the EC2 instance from our local device
 4. SSH into our EC2 instance using a ssh key pair

## Prerequisites

Before we start building, you'll want to have setup a couple things:

> 1. Have an [AWS Account](https://aws.amazon.com) setup

Reviewer: Would be worth linking either to the sign up page or even just the [AWS docs on creating an account](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/accounts/latest/reference/manage-acct-creating.html)

2. Installed [Terraform cli](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/install?product_intent=terraform)

## Step 0 - Create a folder for your project

> As we'll be building our infractructure using Terraform, which is an IaC tool, we'll need somewhere to write this code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we'll be building our infrastructure using Terraform, we'll need somewhere to write this code.
```

Small typo + removing some redundant (imo) information. We spoke briefly about figuring out what the assumed knowledge of your audience would be, unsure if you've defined that yourself but yeah, in my mind I think its safe to assume readers know Terraform is an IaC tool.

Let's create a folder called `my-unicorn-project` and inside that folder create another folder called `infra`.

## Step 1 - Define our Terraform provider

Now we will create our `main.tf` file inside our `infra` folder where we will define our cloud provider.

```terraform
# /infra/main.tf

terraform {
  required_version = ">= 1.2.0"
  required_providers {
    aws = {
            source = "hashicorp/aws"
            version = ">= 5.41.0"
        }
    }
}
```

> Now when you open a terminal in the current directory and run `terraform init` Terraform will download the required provider modules so they can be used to configure our services.

Reviewer: Given your audience is likely new to Terraform, it might be a good idea to provide links that explain certain concepts about Terraform that you don't necessarily need/want to explain yourself. For example, you could link to the Terraform docs to [explain what a "provider" is](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/providers). You may want to provide all these links in an appendix at the end of the post or potentially add a superscript reference to them etc. How/where you provide those links is up to you, this comment is mostly just suggesting adding links to external sources for concepts adjacent to what you're teaching.

## Step 2 - Create an AWS EC2 instance

Now we have successfully initialized terraform with the aws provider we can define aws resources in our code. In this step we will create two things:
1. An AWS EC2 instance resource

> 2. An aws ami image data reference for EC2 to run

Reviewer: Add links with explanations on what these two things actually are. eg 
- [What is Amazon EC2?](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/concepts.html)
- [Amazon Machine Images (AMI)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/AMIs.html)

Create a new file called `unicorn-api.tf`.  
Inside the file, add:

```terraform
# /infra/unicorn-api.tf

data "aws_ami" "amazon_x86_image" {
    most_recent = true
    owners = ["amazon"]
    name_regex = "^al2023-ami-ecs.*"

    filter {
        name = "architecure"
        values = ["x86_64"]
    }
}

resource "aws_instance" "unicorn_vm" {
    ami = data.aws_ami.amazon_x86_image.id
    instance_type = "t2.micro"

    tags = {
        Name = "Unicorn"
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer: Optionally add links and/or comments explaining what [data sources](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/data-sources) and [resources](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/resources) are

> Now when you open the terminal and run `terraform plan` the logs will show that we're adding one new resource.  

Reviewer: Might be worth showing some example output of the `plan` command.

Now try running `terraform apply` to... err... apply the plan.  

It fails! But why?

Even though we've created an aws account, and downloaded Terraform, and the aws provider for Terraform to use, we still need Terraform to authenticate with aws in order to create these resources.

## Step 2.1 - Create an AWS API Key for terraform

> In order for Terraform to manage resources in AWS it needs access to an aws account. We can accomplish this by creating an aws account specifically for this tool and defining corresponding API keys for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order for Terraform to manage resources in AWS it needs access to your AWS account. We can accomplish this by creating credentials specifically for this project and configuring Terraform to use those credentials to create and manage resources.
```

Create a new file called `aws-provider-key.tf` and add the following content:

```terraform
# /infra/aws-provider-key.tf

provider "aws" {
    access_key = ""
    secret_key = ""
    region = "ap-southeast-2"
}
```

> You can opt to use a region closer to you. As I'm in Australia I'm opting to use the australian region.

Reviewer: Link to [AWS docs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/using-regions-availability-zones.html) on what regions are and what regions are available.

Next you need to create two things in the AWS Management Console:

> 1. Create a [new User](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_users_create.html) with administrator permission

Reviewer: This is a pet peeve of mine - instructional blog posts telling people to provide full access to a set of AWS credentials. Ideally we should be demonstrating and promoting good security practices and suggest using a more limited policy. There's two ways to address this (imo) with varying levels of work required by you:

- Continue with full admin permissions but very clearly highlight that giving the API keys full administrative access is a bad idea, quantify the risk and heavily signpost that you shouldn't make a habit of this
- Figure out an appropriate IAM policy that would allow access only to the operations needed to complete this tutorial and provide that policy in your post.

The latter is obviously a lot more work for you compared to the former but might be a useful learning exercise for you.

2. Create an [access key](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_credentials_access-keys.html) for the user

Take the access key and corresponding secret key and add them to your provider key your defined earlier.

> > These API keys should be treated like credentials. Do not commit this file to source control. Otherwise the key could be discovered and you'll need to replace them.

Reviewer: 👏

Now try running `terraform apply` once more and everything should be hunky dory.

## Step 3 - Connect to our EC2 Instance

If you've made it this far it means you've successfully configured terraform with an aws account and have deployed an EC2 instance to AWS. Nice!  
Let's try connect to this instance.  
We can find the ip address by logging in to the AWS Management Console and opening the instance details within EC2.
Copy the IPv4 address and in a terminal run `ping <the-ip-address>`.

No response...  

> This is because when we define the EC2 instance, a default security group is applied to it. This security group allows incoming connections on any port using any protocol but only from other aws resources with the same security group rules...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because when we define the EC2 instance, a default security group is applied to it. This security group allows incoming connections on any port using any protocol but only from other aws resources with the same security group...
```

If we want to connect to our instance, we need to make our own rules.

When defining a security group rule, we declare if the rule is an ingress or egress rule (incoming or outgoing). We can also declare which port the rule applies to and the ip address range.

We don't want just anyone to connect to this service so for now we'll only allow our local device's public ip address in the address range. You can find this easily using a site like [whatismyipaddress.com](www.whatismyipaddress.com). 

Open `unicon-api.tf` and add the following resources, providing your public ip for `cidr_ipv4` value:

```terraform
# /infra/unicorn-api.tf

resource "aws_security_group" "unicorn_api_security_group" {
  name = "unicorn-api-security-group"
}

resource "aws_vpc_security_group_ingress_rule" "allow_from_local_device" {
  security_group_id = aws_security_group.unicorn_api_security_group.id
  description       = "allow ingress on any port from any ip"
  cidr_ipv4         = "<YOUR_IP_ADDRESS_HERE>/32"
  ip_protocol       = "tcp"
  from_port         = 22
  to_port           = 22
}

> ```

Reviewer: Do we want to maybe throw these resources into their own file? or are you planning on providing instructions for a refactor later when the codebase gets bigger?

Totally up to you either way, just encouraging you to make this a conscious choice.

Next, apply the security group to the ec2 instance, adding the following property to the ec2 instance:

```terraform 
# /infra/unicorn-api.tf

resource "aws_instance" "web_service_vm" {

    # ...

  vpc_security_group_ids = [aws_security_group.unicorn_api_security_group.id]
}
```

With these new resources defined, we can re-apply our changes with `terraform apply`. This will rebuild the EC2 instance, so we'll need to get the latest ip address so we can ping it.  
Once the resources have been updated and the latest IP address copied, we can now ping our EC2 instance with:  

> `ping <the-ip-address>`

Reviewer: This will actually fail - the security group rule you've created only allows `TCP` traffic to port `22`. `ping` uses the `ICMP` protocol and not `TCP` so it won't be allowed.

## Step 4 - SSH into the EC2 Instance

In this step we're going to create an ssh key pair using terraform. The public key will be added to the ec2 instance as one of its known ssh public keys.  
We'll save the private key as a local file so we can reference it when we try connect to the ec2 instance.

> First, add the following providers to our `main.tf`:

Reviewer: It'd be worth offering some basic context around why an extra provider is needed here and how the `tls` provider differs from the `aws` provider - namely the `aws` provider largely manages resources "in the cloud" and the `tls` provider provides utilities for managing TLS keys/certificates.

[TLS Provider Docs](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/tls/latest/docs)

```terraform
# infra/main.tf

required_providers {

    # ...

    tls = {
          source  = "hashicorp/tls"
          version = "~> 4.0.4"
        }

    local = {
      source  = "hashicorp/local"
      version = "2.4.1"
    }
}
```

Since we've added new providers, we need to run `terraform init` to download their modules.  

Create a new file named `ssh_key.tf` and add the following:

```terraform
# infra/ssh_key.tf

# create a tls key pair using rsa algorithm
resource "tls_private_key" "ssh_key" {
    algorithm = "RSA"
    rsa_bits = 4096
}

# save the private key to a local file named "key.pem"
resource "local_file" "rsa_key" {
    content = tls_private_key.ssh_key.private_key_openssh
    filename = "${path.module}/key.pem"

> }

Reviewer: Similar to your guidance around AWS API keys above, you should add some guidance here explaining that the private key is a credential/secret and therefore needs to be treated like one. eg don't commit to source control, don't share it with anyone and that it provides full access to your EC2 instance.

on an unrelated note, I'd also recommend setting. the `file_permission` property on this resource to `0600` (read-write access to the current user, zero access to anyone else) as the default is `0777` (full access to the file to all users on the system). Doing this should also avoid a potential issue later on in your guide when using this key with the `ssh` command - the `ssh` command will refuse to use any private key if it has open permissions.

# define an aws key pair, providing the public key from the tls key pair defined above
resource "aws_key_pair" "key_pair_for_ec2_instance" {
    key_name = "ssh-key"
    public_key = tls_private_key.ssh_key.public_key_openssh
}
```

Next, add the following property to your ec2 instance:

```terraform
# infra/unicorn-api.tf

resource "aws_instance" "web_service_vm" {

    # ...

  key_name = aws_key_pair.key_pair_for_ec2_instance.key_name
}
```
With those resources defined and linked to our EC2 instance, we can once again reapply our terraform config to deploy the changes to aws.

Now that those changes have been applied we should now have a new local file, `key.pem`. Before we try ssh into our instance, we need to set the access permissions for this file. Something like `chmod 400 key.pem` should suffice. This will give the current account read permissions for the file, and no permissions for other users.  

> For more information on how chmod works, [see here](https://ss64.com/bash/chmod.html).  

Reviewer: Ah, sorry I didn't see this bit before I wrote the above comment - the explanation is great but I think it'd be better to set the file permissions within terraform itself to avoid any issues or changes to permissions on apply.

> Next we can find the IPv4 DNS name of the instance from the aws management console, this will be something `ec2-11-11-11-11.your-aws-region.compute.amaonaws.com`.  

Reviewer: It might be worth adding an [output value](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/values/outputs) to your terraform code containing the EC2 instance's IP address to make it easier for readers to fetch after each change. eg

```terraform
output "ec2_public_ip" {
  description = "Public IP address of the EC2 instance"
  value       = aws_instance.web_service_vm.public_ip
}
```

Outputs are shown at the end of every apply, or alternatively you can fetch them with the `terraform output` command.

```shell
terraform output                # shows all outputs
terraform output ec2_public_ip  # will show just the output named "ec2_public_ip"
```

required_providers {

    # ...

    tls = {
          source  = "hashicorp/tls"
          version = "~> 4.0.4"
        }

    local = {
      source  = "hashicorp/local"
      version = "2.4.1"
    }
}
```

Since we've added new providers, we need to run `terraform init` to download their modules.  

Create a new file named `ssh_key.tf` and add the following:

```terraform
# infra/ssh_key.tf

# create a tls key pair using rsa algorithm
resource "tls_private_key" "ssh_key" {
    algorithm = "RSA"
    rsa_bits = 4096
}

# save the private key to a local file named "key.pem"
resource "local_file" "rsa_key" {
    content = tls_private_key.ssh_key.private_key_openssh
    filename = "${path.module}/key.pem"
    file_permission = "0600"
}

# define an aws key pair, providing the public key from the tls key pair defined above
resource "aws_key_pair" "key_pair_for_ec2_instance" {
    key_name = "ssh-key"
    public_key = tls_private_key.ssh_key.public_key_openssh
}
```

Next, add the following property to your ec2 instance:

```terraform
# infra/unicorn-api.tf

resource "aws_instance" "web_service_vm" {

    # ...

  key_name = aws_key_pair.key_pair_for_ec2_instance.key_name
}
```

> With those resources defined and linked to our EC2 instance, we can once again reapply our terraform config to deploy the changes to aws.

Author: Add notes for defining the output of the dns name
